Josh Gribbon
Professor McClellan
HHS 468 - History of the World
14 December 2015
Human population and world history
    World history, for these intents and purposes, will be the story of humans, homo sapiens, from when we arrived as a species until the current day. We could not possibly tell the story of us without telling the story of us, in terms of numbers and population. The first humans are estimated to have lived about 200,000 years ago in Africa. They then spread into Europe and Asia 100,000 to 70,000 years ago, down to Australia and up to current day Russia 50,000 to 25,000 years ago, and finally into the Americas 15,000 years ago[7]. During this period of “spreading” population size grew a little, but it was more or less linear growth. This was necessary for hunter-gatherers to survive as they needed to spread out to find more food and support more people. Oddly enough, very soon after spreading around the world agrarian society came about fairly uniformly. Eventually towns and cities formed and became nations, fostering larger populations. When the Industrial Era came about populations growth exploded and landed us in the current day situation where we actually have too many people in certain locations.
Most people have a strong opinion on the human population size. Often remarks are made that we need another plague to trim down the population, or comments about the sheer density of populations in various parts of the world. We like to think we have become the apex predators, owners of the world, and in a league of our own - not just another animal. The history of our population tells a story of struggles and relatively slow growth, with anecdotes of catastrophe threatening the continuation of the species as a whole. In recent years, however, population has grown at exponential and unprecedented rates. These two extremes have had lasting effects on both the population size itself and global society as a whole. The tough times have spurned advances particularly in medicine, and the recent and continuing growth has forced us to change the way we live to accommodate for volume and density. On a global level, population can be shown to both a centripetal and centrifugal force. Growing populations have largely forced us to spread out across the globe, but have also been a source of people uniting and forming cities. The true progress for societies happened as a result of populations growing to the point where it made sense for people to group together. This grouping caused stratification in social classes, and formed the foundation for the world as we know it today. Population grew very slowly whle spreading out. When populations grew too large in certain areas there needed to be some type of management, which ultimately led to cities and all the different jobs we have today. This in turn led to people coming together more for convenience and trade.
    About 70,000 years ago the Earth was rocked by the explosion of the Toba supervolcano. The Toba eruption is believed to have caused a volcanic winter across the globe, and potentially a one thousand year cooling period. The volcanic explosivity index was at least eight, which is described as apocalyptic, ultimately causing a layer of about six inches of ash over the entirety of South Asia, with additional ash covered the Indian Ocean, Arabian Sea, and South China Sea[1]. This eruption has commonly been linked to a genetic bottleneck occurring in the human population around the same time, with the aftermath estimated to reduce the population to 3,000 - 10,000 humans, and genetic evidence suggesting all current humans descended from a group of 1,000-10,000 breeding pairs, also about 70,000 years ago[2]. This is a huge decrease from estimates of human population before Toba, which are commonly believed to be around 350,000 individuals, with other estimates ranging between 125,000 and 1.2 million. This means the Toba event likely killed at least 92% of the population and potentially as high as 99.83%, making this by far the single largest event negatively affecting the population, when measured by percent killed. I say by percent because the death count would have been between between 124,000 and 1.2 million, whereas later events killed many millions, while affecting the whole population less.
    Supporters of the “Toba catastrophe theory” attribute the decrease in population to destruction of vegetation and severe drought, compounded by a volcanic winter, crippling the ability of the hunter-gatherer groups prevalent at this time to find food and support themselves. Other population bottlenecks have been seen around the same time, particularly in primates. This bottleneck is particularly interesting because it suggests that all the current differentiation on humans has occurred in the last 70,000 years, as we very liked lost many of the different “breeds” of sapiens that would have developed in the approximately 150,000 years before that humans were around. This theory have been fought in recent years, after becoming popular in in the late 1900s. The new theory proposes that Toba may have caused the greatest in a long series of events creating a bottleneck gradually over many thousand years, where population may have dropped as low as 2000 multiple times in that period, creating a more significant bottleneck genetically, where genes would have been “concentrated” more during that period through generations of limited breeding.
    After natural disasters, disease poses the next biggest immediate threat to the human population in terms of likelihood of inducing extinction. Malaria, for instance, has been proposed to have killed half of all people ever, and likely has been affecting animals since the dinosaurs[4]. The bubonic plague, however, has created more pandemic-type events where large portions of the population were taken quickly. The first of these events recorded was the plague of Justinian, starting in 541CE. It affected the entire roman empire and killed 25 million of the world's 200 million people at the time immediately, taking another 50 million over the next two centuries of repeated outbreaks. At it’s peak 5000 people per day were dying from the plague in Constantinople alone. One quarter of the Eastern Mediterranean fell victim in the few years following the initial outbreak. This first outbreak proved to be the first of many that would return and last for hundreds of years at a time, devastated groups and populations across the world.
    Perhaps the best known outbreak was the bubonic plague or “black death”, as it was called due to it’s characteristic blackening of body parts due to the flesh dying, that occurred starting in the early 14th century and lasting the next four centuries. This wave took anywhere from 75-200 million between 1338 and 1353 CE. It most likely started in Asia, along with the Justinian plague, and spread through the silk road throughout Asia and Europe. This plague affected Asia significantly more than the last as a result of the Mongol conquest. Farming and trading were reduced from the violence, and a resulting famine exacerbated the disease. The result was 25 million death in Asia before the disease reached Constantinople 15 years later. It went on to take 20% of the population in areas such as England and Germany, and as high as 80% in France and Spain, reducing the world population from 450M to 350M by the end of the 14th century. 
    That outbreak would go on to many notable occurrences, Milan 1629, Seville 1647, London 1665, Vienna 1679, the Baltics 1708, Marseille 1720. The plague was in fact noted to be present somewhere in Europe and and Asia every single year between 1346 and 1671. More recently it has been in China 1855, Australia 1900,, San Francisco of the United States in 1900 and 1907, generally in the US between 1944 and 1993, and in 2015 at the time of writing there are recorded 5-10 cases per year in the US. Plague has proven to be the quintessential “extinction disease” in popular culture in recent years, and the most notable pandemic in recorded history.
    Also notable is the flu in its various forms. The Spanish flu in 1918 proved to be a different type of flu, and particularly deadly. This pandemic targeted the immune system by having it overreact and cause damage, meaning people with the strongest immune system were affected worst. 500 million were affected, and 50 to 100 million were killed as a result, which made up 3-5% of the world population at the time. Because the disease targeting the highest contributing members of society the most, the disruption was felt rather strongly, and spread quickly as the world continued to become more connected in the 20th century.
    The chart of human population shows severe exponential growth, starting around the early 18th century. Before that time population grew relatively steadily, on a linear path with occasional dips and bumps. In contrast the growth since then is more than linear even on a log scale, or in other words more than just exponential. The industrial era hit and population growth skyrocketed. This new era brought new industrial processes, water and steam power, machine tools, and factories. Huge advances were made in science and medicine, and the life of the average person became drastically better. Many of these variables combined and made it the perfect time for humans to really expand. Were were prepared more than ever to handle larger groups of people, spread out farther, build homes for new people and feed them all. This was really the biggest increase in the standard of living in history. Social stratification increased more than ever, creating new jobs for everyone, and increases in food production efficiency allowed a larger percent of the population to do the new jobs.
    On top of a whole new social and economic structure, countries were starting to become more connected and global markets were developing in a way that grew markets around the world from any localized developments. Much like when people started to grow food to supply the town or state, countries now grew to provide for the world. It was very much economies maturing on a global scale in the same way the groups of hunter-gatherers did 13,000 years or so earlier when agrarian society developed and individuals were able to produce an excess. The Industrial Era marked not only a change in the way we worked, lived, and produced, but in the way countries interacted with each other. Robert Lucas describes this change in “Trade and the Diffusion of the Industrial Revolution”. He calls the Industrial Revolution “the modern era of sustained growth in living standards”[8]. This really did mark the first time where we expected living standards to increase drastically. This increase was created by a combined increase in populations, and, again from Lucas, “a more than 40-fold increase in GDP per capita” over two centuries. The average person now produced for what 40 people needed, and surplus meant new jobs and opportunities. This system fed into into and was really the driving force behind the population growth we’ve been seeing since that period.
    Population has continued to grow so much, passing 4 billion people in 1974, 5 billion in 1987, 6 billion in 1999, and 7 billion in 2011, that many countries are feeling the pressure to address population growth in more aggressive ways. China experienced immense population growth during the middle of the 20th century as a result of life expectancy increasing dramatically from only 35 years in 1948 to 66 years in 1976. Their total population want from 540M in 1949 to 960M in 1976. Kowloon Walled City developed as a result of a Japanese occupation in China increasing population and created an ungoverned settlement with no building codes. Throughout the to mid 20th century people poured into Kowloon Walled City and created a diverse ecosystem built around what was most likely the densest population ever. When the decision was made to demolish the Walled City in 1987, there were approximately 33,000 residents in 6.4 acres, which is about two and a half regulation football(soccer) fields, or one person per 8.4 square feet. Buildings were built so high and close together that sunlight rarely reached the lower levels, which were lit artificially. Because it was ungoverned drug usage and crime was rampant, and society there was mostly run by Triad groups, gangs, or cartels, so much in fact that police would only enter the city in large groups[6].
Here, prostitutes installed themselves on one side of the street, while a priest preached and handed out powdered milk to the poor on the other; social workers gave guidance, while drug addicts squatted under the stairs getting high; what were children's games centres by day became strip show venues by night. It was a very complex place, difficult to generalise about, a place that seemed frightening but where most people continued to lead normal lives. A place just like the rest of Hong Kong.[5]
Thousands of police raids in the 1970s fought to control the crime rates, and in 1984 the Chinese and British governments made a plan to demolish the city, and replace it with the Kowloon Walled City Park, completed in 1995.
    From the Toba catastrophe almost wiping up out to today where we have the problem of too many people, the story of the human population on Earth has had many ups and downs. Some of these events spread people out such as population growth in general and disease causing pockets of the population to thin out, while others brought the whole of humanity together, such as the Toba catastrophe by killing all but a select group, and the Industrial Era, which connected markets and politics, increasing communicated through trade. This centripetal and centrifugal forces are one theme that can found in most stories of a world history. We as a population are particularly interesting because we spread in a way that is not consistent with most other animals. Bodies of water were commonly a problem for travel, rather than a pathway, such as in the case of marine life, yet we managed to spread across the world, separating as much as possible. After we spread out we came together, first locally in towns, cities, nations, then globally through communication resulting from trade. Even while spread out, without communicating, we still seemed connected through actions like the move from hunting and gathering to agrarian society all around the same period, or even monuments like the pyramids being developed the same way in opposite parts of the world. They may not be any meaning in relating the pushing and pulling found in the story of how we got here, to the waves or the seasons, or even the spreading out and theorized “crunching” of the universe, but it does all certainly seem connected, and at a minimum makes for an interesting thought exercise.
